blog/content/post/2022-01-03-pcie_screamer.md :content updated (#501)
3mdeb/news-and-ideas: blog/content/post/2022-01-03-pcie_screamer.md

As a result, an FPGA configuration file will be created. Attention! this command
may take up to an hour to execute (depending on the speed of the computer used).

7. The last command is:
   
  ```tcl
   vivado_flash_hs2.tcl 
  ```
  which is writing the configuration file (bitstream) to the FPGA board (using 
  JTAG programmer/debugger). Attention! Before issuing the last command JTAG 
  programmer (for example Xilinx Cable) must be properly connected to JTAG header 
  on PCIScreamer board and it must be properly powered - see screen-shot:

  ![Vivado TCL console](PCIScreamerBoard.jpg)
In our case after writing bitstream file to Flash memory of FPGA board there were
information in Vivado `TCL console` window that this operation was successful.

## Testing PCIScreamer board in desktop computer
After the correct programming of the PCIScreamer FPGA board, we proceeded to 
testing its operation in a real computer. After embedding the PCIScreamer board
in the PCI express slot and switching the power to PCI express, we started testing
it in the Linux operating system (Ubuntu). The green LED was on, which indicated 

> that the power supply was correct and the board is working properly.Next step was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that the power supply was correct and the board is working properly.The device is visible on PCI bus:
```

Please remove these lines, `lspci` is a commonly used command and there is no need to explain it
```
```bash
  $ lspci
``` 
This command list all devices seen on PCI bus in computer. Its result was:
```

issuing command in console:
```bash

>   $ lspci

Reviewer: Please remove indentation (indentation should be the same as fence blocks), there is a few cases of this problem around document.

``` 
This command list all devices seen on PCI bus in computer. Its result was:
```bash

> mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~$ lspci

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ lspci
```

00:00.0 Host bridge: Intel Corporation Xeon E3-1200 v2/3rd Gen Core processor DRAM Controller (rev 09)
00:02.0 VGA compatible controller: Intel Corporation IvyBridge GT2 [HD Graphics 4000] (rev 09)
. . .
00:1f.5 IDE interface: Intel Corporation 7 Series/C210 Series Chipset Family 2-port SATA Controller [IDE mode] (rev 04)
02:00.0 Memory controller: Xilinx Corporation Device 7022 (rev 01)

> mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~$

Reviewer: Please remove this line

```
As you can see the last device was: **Memory controller: Xilinx Corporation Device
7022 (rev 01)** and this is how PCIScreamer should be visible on PCI bus.
After connecting the computer via USB 3.0 cable to the connector on the PCIScreamer
board, it should be visible in the OS. In order to check this, we ran the command 
in the console:
```bash
   $ lsusb
```
The result are below:

> ```bash

Reviewer: Same as above

mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~$ lsusb
Bus 002 Device 002: ID 8087:0024 Intel Corp. Integrated Rate Matching Hub
Bus 002 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0002 Linux Foundation 2.0 root hub
Bus 001 Device 004: ID 093a:2510 Pixart Imaging, Inc. Optical Mouse
Bus 001 Device 003: ID 04d9:1602 Holtek Semiconductor, Inc. USB Keyboard
Bus 001 Device 005: ID 0403:601f Future Technology Devices International, Ltd Myriad-RF LimeSDR-Mini
Bus 001 Device 002: ID 8087:0024 Intel Corp. Integrated Rate Matching Hub
Bus 001 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0002 Linux Foundation 2.0 root hub
Bus 004 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0003 Linux Foundation 3.0 root hub
Bus 003 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0002 Linux Foundation 2.0 root hub
mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~$ 
```
The device: **Bus 001 Device 005: ID 0403:601f Future Technology Devices International, Ltd Myriad-RF LimeSDR-Mini** is FTDI (USB 3.0), and this is also 
valid.

> Now we can go to tests with the application `PCIleech`. We can download ready-made

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can go to tests with the application `PCIleech`. We can download prebuilt
```

> binary packages (Linux x64) from this page [PCIleech software](https://github.com/ufrisk/pcileech/releases/tag/v4.15) Po rozpakowaniu archiwum z aplikacją wydajemy w konsoli komendę:

Reviewer: missing translation

```bash
mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~/PCIScreamer$ ./pcileech
./pcileech: error while loading shared libraries: libcrypto.so.1.1: cannot open shared object file: No such file or directory
mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~/PCIScreamer$
```
It turns out that `pcileech` depends on the archival version of the library
`openssl` (which is not available as package in OS repository). The solution was
building this library from sources. Here is sequence of command issued in console
in order to build this library:
```bash
wget https://www.openssl.org/source/openssl-1.1.1o.tar.gz
cd openssl-1.1.1o
./config
make
make test
sudo make install
find / -name libssl.so.1.1
ln -s /usr/local/lib64/libssl.so.1.1  /usr/lib64/libssl.so.1.1
ln -s /usr/local/lib64/libssl.so.1.1  /usr/lib/libssl.so.1.1
find / -name libcrypto.so.1.1
ln -s /home/ubuntu/openssl-1.1.1o/libcrypto.so.1.1    /usr/lib64/libcrypto.so.1.1

> ln -s /home/ubuntu/openssl-1.1.1o/libcrypto.so.1.1     /usr/lib/libcrypto.so.1.1

Reviewer: This is wrong.
First, we should never create files /usr ourselves (vs /usr/local). Generally, `/usr` is managed by system's package manager, e.g. apt and dpkg, manually modifying system files may result in mayor problems.
Here we override system's provided OpenSSL with an older version, which may have critical vulnerabilities or may not work at all with modern applications that were built agains newer OpenSSL version.
In Ubuntu OpenSSL is installed at `/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libcrypto.so.1.1`. Since binary worked after installation I assume that `/usr/lib` has precedence over `/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/` and that OpenSSL got overrided globally which may put system at risk.

OpenSSL can be installed to `/usr/local` (or anywhere else) and we may point to its library directory using `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` env variable, also there is possibility to use `patchelf` to override library path in executable itself and avoid using `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`.

However, if `pcileech` can be easily built we should prefer that instead of providing old libraries.

PCILEECH: Failed to connect to the device.
mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~/PCIScreamer$ 
```
The FTDI for USB 3.0 chip is used to connect the PCIScreamer board with a PC, 
the driver is not embedded in the Linux kernel. So I compiled the driver
for the FTDI chip from the sources in this Github repository: [FTDI FT50x driver](https://github.com/ufrisk/pcileech/releases/tag/v4.15) The compilation was successful, 
and after it was finished we have such files in working directory:

```bash
mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~/GIT1/pcie_screamer/drivers/ft60x$ ls
51-ft60x.rules  ft60x.ko   ft60x.mod.c  ft60x.o     ftd3xx.h    Makefile       Module.symvers
ft60x.c         ft60x.mod  ft60x.mod.o  ftconfig.c  loopback.c  modules.order
mgabryelski@maciej-HP:
```
We try to load kernel module with FTDI driver issuing command:

```bash
mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~/PCIScreamer$ sudo insmod ft60x.ko
````

After that the kernel module is loaded:

```bash
mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~/PCIScreamer$ lsmod
Module                  Size  Used by
ft60x                  20480  0
algif_skcipher         16384  0
af_alg                 32768  1 algif_skcipher
binfmt_misc            24576  1
```

> Now checking `pcileech` application we have;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now checking `pcileech` application we have:
```

```bash
mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~/PCIScreamer$ sudo insmod ft60x.ko
````

After that the kernel module is loaded:

```bash
mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~/PCIScreamer$ lsmod
Module                  Size  Used by
ft60x                  20480  0
algif_skcipher         16384  0
af_alg                 32768  1 algif_skcipher
binfmt_misc            24576  1
```
Now checking `pcileech` application we have;
```bash
gabryelski@maciej-HP:~/PCIScreamer$ sudo ./pcileech probe -device fpga -v

DEVICE: FPGA: ERROR: Unable to load FTD3XX.dll [0,v0.0,0000]
PCILEECH: Failed to connect to the device.
mgabryelski@maciej-HP:~/PCIScreamer$ 
```
As we can see, the problem still exists. I tried also building `pcileech` application 
from sources following this tutorial [PCILeech on Linux](https://github.com/ufrisk/pcileech/releases/tag/v4.15).

The following command was issued as the last test:
```bash
sudo ./pcileech probe -device fpga://ft2232h=1 -v
```
After this command such output was  seen:
```bash
DEVICE: FPGA: ERROR: Unable to connect to device [0,v0.0,0000]
PCILEECH: Failed to connect to the device.
```
This time it wasn't information about FTDI driver, but about communication by PCI

> bus. Also firmware version hasn't been correctly read off: [0,v0.0,0000] . Unfortunately, all attempts to communicate the `pcileech` application with the 

Reviewer: What output does pcileech give when you execute this command without having the device connected?
```
sudo ./pcileech probe -device fpga://ft2232h=1 -v
```
Is the output the same or different?

Author: It is the same.
